---
title: A Simpler Unit Testing Setup for WordPress
ogImage: "https://images.pexels.com/photos/1366942/pexels-photo-1366942.jpeg?cs=srgb&dl=beaker-biology-chemical-1366942.jpg&fm=jpg"
---

When I was getting started in web development, I remember how conceptually overwhelming it was to understand the whys, whats, and hows around things like unit testing. And to make it even more difficult, WordPress was the environment in which I spent most of my time &mdash; a platform not well-known for its strong culture of unit testing.

As far as I can tell, the most-recommended resource for unit testing in WordPress is the [scaffolding provided by the WP-CLI.](https://make.wordpress.org/cli/handbook/plugin-unit-tests/) Run a command, and it'll do things like download a copy of WordPress, set up a test database, and provide some nice-to-have methods for integrating your tests with the WP infrastructure itself. The problem is that every time I’ve tried to get this set up — for both themes and plugins — I’ve run into unexpected database or file structure issues. I spend a good share of time working through them, and then *maybe* have enough mental motivation to write a test.

***There’s got to be an easier way to set this stuff up.***

I like what the WP-CLI approach has to offer. The helper methods provided by `WP_UnitTestCase` (the class you can extend rather than `PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase`) alone might make it worth working through the setup friction. But sometimes, you just wanna start writing some friggin' tests to build some value for your theme or plugin. In those cases, there's a better way: **hook it up yourself.** It's not as scary as it sounds.

## Let's Get Set Up

For this run-through, I'll be using my [wp-skateboard](https://github.com/alexmacarthur/wp-skateboard) setup, which runs on Docker, but it really doesn't matter whether you're using this, Vagrant, or anything else. But if you are using Docker, make sure you run any of the following commands inside your running container. To help with that, `wp-skateboard` allows you to run `make bash` to easily enter the container with a bash prompt.

We’ll also be using Composer for package management and autoloading. And because most tutorials I’ve found focus on plugins, we’ll stick there too.

#### Install PHPUnit with Composer.

To start, `cd` into your plugin, and go through the prompts of the `composer init` command. If you already have a `composer.json` file in the directory, just move on.

After that, add bit of autoloading data that’ll come in handy later. Here, we tell Composer to automatically include certain files within the `tests/` directory (where our tests will live) when they’re namespaced to `PluginTests`. A little more on that in a bit.

```json
"autoload-dev": {
    "psr-4": {
        "PluginTests\\": "tests/"
    }
}
```

Next up, we need to install PHPUnit.

`composer require phpunit/phpunit --dev`

After this completes, test your installation with by running the following command.

`vendor/bin/phpunit`

You should see a bunch of information looking something like this:

```bash
PHPUnit 8.2.3 by Sebastian Bergmann and contributors.

Usage: phpunit [options] UnitTest [UnitTest.php]
        phpunit [options] <directory>

Code Coverage Options:

    --coverage-clover <file>    Generate code coverage report in Clover XML format
    --coverage-crap4j <file>    Generate code coverage report in Crap4J XML format
    ...
```

#### Load WordPress via our phpunit.xml file.

Since this is a *WordPress* plugin, we’ll likely need access to some level of WP core functionality in order to effectively test our code. To make all of that available, we're going to load WP core during our tests by bootstrapping it in our `phpunit.xml` file. Throw some basic configuration into that file, and take special note of the `bootstrap` attribute:

```xml
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<phpunit bootstrap="bootstrap.php">
    <testsuites>
        <testsuite name="WP Unit Testing">
            <directory suffix="Test.php">./tests/</directory>
        </testsuite>
    </testsuites>
</phpunit>
```

Here, we’re loading a `bootstrap.php` file, which will be created in our plugin directory, loading two things:

- `autoload.php` - This is generated by running `composer install`, and will take care of the PHP autoloading configuration we added earlier.
- `wp-load.php` - This is a file from WordPress core that’ll load the CMS functionality we’ll need to run our plugin’s code as we test it.

```php
<?php

// bootstrap.php

require_once(__DIR__ . "/../vendor/autoload.php");
require_once(__DIR__ . "/../../../../wp-load.php");
```

With this in place, these two files will be loaded every time our test suite runs, providing us with the resources we need to test.

Also, take note of this line back in our `phpunit.xml` file:

```xml
<directory suffix="Test.php">./tests/</directory>
```

What this is doing is specifying the type of named files we’re doing to run as tests within the `./tests` directory. Since that suffix is set to “Test.php,” any file that ends with that string will be run.

At this point, try running `vendor/bin/phpunit` again. This time, you should see something that looks more like this:

```bash
PHPUnit 7.3.5 by Sebastian Bergmann and contributors.



Time: 1.03 seconds, Memory: 22.00MB

No tests executed!
```

## Testing Time

Create a `tests` directory in your plugin, and inside that, a `SomeClassTest.php` file. Remember, that file name is important. Now, let’s just verify that we can get a test to run without issue. Throw some meaningless test in there. A method is deemed a test when its name starts with `test`.

```php
<?php

class SomeClassTest extends \PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase
{
    public function test_shouldWork()
    {
        $this->assertTrue(true);
    }
}
```

Running `vendor/bin/phpunit` should produce something like the following:

```bash
PHPUnit 8.2.3 by Sebastian Bergmann and contributors.

.                                                                   1 / 1 (100%)

Time: 2.59 seconds, Memory: 54.25 MB
```
Noice.

#### Let's make things more WordPress-y.

From here on out, we can start leveraging the WordPress ecosystem as needed. For a stupid example, let’s say we have a method that’ll retrieve the content of a post in an emotionalized based on the tags attached to the post. Specifically, we’ll format the content differently if the post is tagged `angry`, `excited`, or `obnoxious`.

```php
<?php

/*
Plugin Name: Unit Testing Plugin
*/

function getEmotionalizedContent($postId)
{
    $content = get_the_content(null, false, $postId);

    if (has_tag('angry', $postId)) {
        $content = strtoupper($content);
    }

    if (has_tag('excited', $postId)) {
        $loudContent = array_map(function ($character) {
            if ($character === ".") {
                return str_repeat("!", rand(1, 10));
            }
            return $character;
        }, str_split($content));
        $content = implode($loudContent);
    }

    if (has_tag('obnoxious', $postId)) {
        $content = str_replace(" ", " 👏 ", $content);
    }

    return $content;
}
```

Because our PHPUnit configuration is set to import WordPress core, our tests will have access to this plugin (make sure it’s active in the WP admin!), as well as everything else loaded by WordPress’ `wp-load.php` file. So, we should be ready to dive in & test.

First off, let’s add some code to `SomePostClass` that’ll provide us with a post to manipulate and clean up after we’re finished.

```php
class SomePostClass extends \PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase
{
    public $testPostId;

    protected function setUp(): void
    {
        $this->testPostId = wp_insert_post([
            'post_title' => 'Sample Post',
            'post_content' => 'This is just some sample post content.'
        ]);
    }
    protected function tearDown(): void
    {
        wp_delete_post($this->testPostId, true);
    }

    //... tests will go here.
}
```

Leveraging `setUp()` and `tearDown()`, we’re creating a fresh WP post and deleting it after any given test method is complete. Since we’re passing `true` to `wp_delete_post`, it’ll also [clean up any attached post meta we create along the way.](https://codex.wordpress.org/Function_Reference/wp_delete_post)

After that, we can add our method-specific tests to cover all of our cases.

```php
public function test_getEmotionalizedContent_shouldBeAngryWhenTagIsApplied()
{
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'angry', true);
    $this->assertEquals(
        getEmotionalizedContent($this->testPostId),
        "THIS IS JUST SOME SAMPLE POST CONTENT."
    );
}

public function test_getEmotionalizedContent_shouldBeExcitedWhenTagIsApplied()
{
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'excited', true);
    $this->assertStringEndsWith(
        "!",
        getEmotionalizedContent($this->testPostId)
    );
}

public function test_getEmotionalizedContent_shouldBeObnoxiousWhenTagIsApplied()
{
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'obnoxious', true);
    $this->assertEquals(
        getEmotionalizedContent($this->testPostId),
        "This 👏 is 👏 just 👏 some 👏 sample 👏 post 👏 content."
    );
}

public function test_getEmotionalizedContent_shouldBeEverythingWhenTagAreApplied()
{
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'obnoxious', true);
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'excited', true);
    wp_set_post_tags($this->testPostId, 'angry', true);

    $result = getEmotionalizedContent($this->testPostId);

    $this->assertStringStartsWith(
        "THIS 👏 IS 👏 JUST 👏 SOME 👏 SAMPLE 👏 POST 👏 CONTENT",
        $result
    );
    $this->assertStringEndsWith("!", $result);
}
```

Running `vendor/bin/phpunit` again, you should see some success:

```bash
root@bc37c28f5d63:/var/www/html/wp-content/plugins/unit-testing-plugin# vendor/bin/phpunitPHPUnit 8.2.3 by Sebastian Bergmann and contributors.

....                                                                4 / 4 (100%)

Time: 3.44 seconds, Memory: 32.00 MB

OK (4 tests, 5 assertions)
```

Gr8 work. But as your tests grow, it’s likely that you’ll need to interact with posts throughout several different classes. So, let’s abstract a bit of this WordPress-specific stuff out into its own class that extends `\PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase`.

```php
<?php

namespace PluginTests;

class PostTestCase extends \PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase
{
    public $testPostId;

    public function setUp(): void
    {
        $this->testPostId = wp_insert_post([
            'post_title' => 'Sample Post',
            'post_content' => 'This is just some sample post content.'
        ]);
    }

    public function tearDown(): void
    {
        wp_delete_post($this->testPostId, true);
    }
}
```

Then, in our test class, we can extend this new helper class:

```diff
-class SomePostTest extends \PHPUnit\Framework\TestCase
+class SomePostTest extends \PluginTests\PostTestCase
```

Thanks to that bit of autoloading configuration we did earlier, we don’t need to include our new helper class — it happens automatically, out of sight. And as a result, from here on out, we can easily access `$this->testPostId` and any other resource we choose to make available in `PostTestCase`, rather than handling all of the setup and cleanup within our individual test classes.

As the need arises, you can create your own different test cases from which to extend, perhaps based on the type of resource you need. For example, a `\PluginTests\UserTestCase` might be good to have in order to easily test code pertaining to WordPress user objects.


## Yeah, Trade-Offs Exist

The value this entire approach gives is (hopefully) a quicker path to start writing tests in WordPress. That said, there are some trade-offs that come along it. For example:


- **If you’re not careful in how you clean up the data you create when running tests, your local DB could get pretty muddy.** In many cases, it might be better to manually create a test DB and point your application to that while testing. I’m sure there’s some clever programmatic way to do this with the setup I’ve explained, but I haven’t explored those waters much.
- **You miss out on the features included with the WordPress-recommended test suite setup.** Yeah, a lot of this would be nice to be able to leverage, but I’ve found that I don’t need much in order to set up valuable tests for my code using this simplified approach here. That could change at any given moment, but until that happens, I’m good with this being sacrificed.


## Feedback: Whatcha Got?

If you’ve got some tips to improve this whole setup without losing its relative simplicity, share them! At any rate, hope this is helpful.

